---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.3.6 Release Announcement'
date: '2016-08-10'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

This is the first release from the new "solidity-standalone" repository. It does not have dependencies to cpp-ethereum anymore and can be built just from the solidity github repository.

Note that the optimizer was disabled in some situations which could lead to larger (but correcter) code.

Features:
- Formal verification: Take external effects on a contract into account.
- Type Checker: Warning about unused return value of low-level calls and send.
- Output: Source location and node id as part of AST output
- Output: Source location mappings for bytecode
- Output: Formal verification as part of json compiler output.

Bugfixes:
- Commandline Interface: Do not crash if input is taken from stdin.
- Scanner: Correctly support unicode escape codes in strings.
- JSON output: Fix error about relative / absolute source file names.
- JSON output: Fix error about invalid utf8 strings.
- Code Generator: Dynamic allocation of empty array caused infinite loop.
- Code Generator: Correctly calculate gas requirements for memcpy precompile.
- Optimizer: Clear known state if two code paths are joined.

Note regarding the PPA: This version of the solc package conflicts with the cpp-ethereum package (because that still contains solidity). Please uninstall cpp-ethereum before installing solc until we also have a new cpp-ethereum release.


A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.3.6).
  