---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.4.3 Release Announcement'
date: '2016-10-25'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

This is a real bugfix release as you can see from the changelog below. The most important fix concerns the optimizer which generated invalid code connected to the `SHA3` opcode in certain situations.

**Features:**
- Inline assembly: support both `suicide` and `selfdestruct` opcodes
  (note: `suicide` is deprecated).
- Inline assembly: issue warning if stack is not balanced after block.
- Include `keccak256()` as an alias to `sha3()`.
- Support shifting constant numbers.

**Bugfixes:**
- Commandline interface: Disallow unknown options in `solc`.
- Name resolver: Allow inheritance of `enum` definitions.
- Type checker: Proper type checking for bound functions.
- Type checker: fixed crash related to invalid fixed point constants
- Type checker: fixed crash related to invalid literal numbers.
- Type checker: `super.x` does not look up `x` in the current contract.
- Code generator: expect zero stack increase after `super` as an expression.
- Code generator: fix an internal compiler error for `L.Foo` for `enum Foo` defined in library `L`.
- Code generator: allow inheritance of `enum` definitions.
- Inline assembly: support the `address` opcode.
- Inline assembly: fix parsing of assignment after a label.
- Inline assembly: external variables of unsupported type (such as `this`, `super`, etc.)
  are properly detected as unusable.
- Inline assembly: support variables within modifiers.
- Optimizer: fix related to stale knowledge about SHA3 operations


A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.4.3).
  