---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.4.11 Release Announcement'
date: '2017-05-03'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

This release fixes a bug in the optimizer (more about this on the [blog](https://blog.soliditylang.org/2017/05/03/solidity-optimizer-bug/)), introduces the standard JSON interface, adds ``interface`` contracts and implements some additional safety checks.

The standard [JSON interface](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/develop/using-the-compiler.html#compiler-input-and-output-json-description) provides a unified way to invoke the Solidity compiler in order to ease cross-platform adoption and compilation verification.

**Features:**
 * Implement the Standard JSON Input / Output API
 * Support ``interface`` contracts.
 * C API (``jsonCompiler``): Add the ``compileStandard()`` method to process a Standard JSON I/O.
 * Commandline interface: Add the ``standard-json`` parameter to process a Standard JSON I/O.
 * Commandline interface: Support ``allow-paths`` to define trusted import paths. Note: the
   path(s) of the supplied source file(s) is always trusted.
 * Inline Assembly: Storage variable access using ``_slot`` and ``_offset`` suffixes.
 * Inline Assembly: Disallow blocks with unbalanced stack.
 * Static analyzer: Warn about statements without effects.
 * Static analyzer: Warn about unused local variables, parameters, and return parameters.
 * Syntax checker: issue deprecation warning for unary '+'

**Bugfixes:**
 * Assembly output: Implement missing AssemblyItem types.
 * Compiler interface: Fix a bug where source indexes could be inconsistent between Solidity compiled
   with different compilers (clang vs. gcc) or compiler settings. The bug was visible in AST
   and source mappings.
 * Gas Estimator: Reflect the most recent fee schedule.
 * Type system: Contract inheriting from base with unimplemented constructor should be abstract.
 * Optimizer: Number representation bug in the constant optimizer fixed.




A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.4.11).
  