---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.4.18 Release Announcement'
date: '2017-10-18'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

This release adds further backwards-incompatible security measures enabled via ``pragma experimental "v0.5.0";`` and contains another important feature: You can now select to compile only certain contracts using the ``outputSelection`` field of the [standard-json-io](https://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/develop/using-the-compiler.html#input-description) compiler interface, which should speed up tools like truffle tremendously.

There are also two important bug fixes: One was an oversight in the way `bytes` variables are allocated in memory and can reduce the memory requirements 32-fold. The second is a security fix: In extremely specific circumstances, it can happen that a regular function is called instead of the fallback function for an Ether transfer without data. These circumstances are: The function has to have a zero signature (one out of 4294967296), it has to be payable, the contract cannot have more than five (external) functions and it cannot have a fallback function.

**Features:**
 * Code Generator: Always use all available gas for calls as experimental 0.5.0 feature
   (previously, some amount was retained in order to work in pre-Tangerine-Whistle
   EVM versions)
 * Parser: Better error message for unexpected trailing comma in parameter lists.
 * Standard JSON: Support the ``outputSelection`` field for selective compilation of supplied sources.
 * Syntax Checker: Unary ``+`` is now a syntax error as experimental 0.5.0 feature.
 * Type Checker: Disallow non-pure constant state variables as experimental 0.5.0 feature.
 * Type Checker: Do not add members of ``address`` to contracts as experimental 0.5.0 feature.
 * Type Checker: Force interface functions to be external as experimental 0.5.0 feature.
 * Type Checker: Require ``storage`` or ``memory`` keyword for local variables as experimental 0.5.0 feature.

**Bugfixes:**
 * Code Generator: Allocate one byte per memory byte array element instead of 32.
 * Code Generator: Do not accept data with less than four bytes (truncated function
   signature) for regular function calls - fallback function is invoked instead.
 * Optimizer: Remove unused stack computation results.
 * Parser: Fix source location of VariableDeclarationStatement.
 * Type Checker: Allow ``gas`` in view functions.
 * Type Checker: Do not mark event parameters as shadowing state variables.
 * Type Checker: Prevent duplicate event declarations.
 * Type Checker: Properly check array length and don't rely on an assertion in code generation.
 * Type Checker: Properly support overwriting members inherited from ``address`` in a contract
   (such as ``balance``, ``transfer``, etc.)
 * Type Checker: Validate each number literal in tuple expressions even if they are not assigned from.



A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.4.18).
  