---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.4.10 Release Announcement'
date: '2017-03-15'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

This release is focused on stability and also introduces some new smart contract safety features: ``require``, ``assert`` and ``transfer``. Note that the new ``revert`` function will only be gas-efficient starting from homestead.

**Features:**
 * Add ``assert(condition)``, which throws if condition is false (meant for internal errors).
 * Add ``require(condition)``, which throws if condition is false (meant for invalid input).
 * Commandline interface: Do not overwrite files unless forced.
 * Introduce ``.transfer(value)`` for sending Ether.
 * Code generator: Support ``revert()`` to abort with rolling back, but not consuming all gas.
 * Inline assembly: Support ``revert`` (EIP140) as an opcode.
 * Parser: Support scientific notation in numbers (e.g. ``2e8`` and ``200e-2``).
 * Type system: Support explicit conversion of external function to address.
 * Type system: Warn if base of exponentiation is literal (result type might be unexpected).
 * Type system: Warn if constant state variables are not compile-time constants.

**Bugfixes:**
 * Commandline interface: Always escape filenames (replace ``/``, ``:`` and ``.`` with ``_``).
 * Commandline interface: Do not try creating paths ``.`` and ``..``.
 * Commandline interface: Allow long library names.
 * Parser: Disallow octal literals.
 * Type system: Fix a crash caused by continuing on fatal errors in the code.
 * Type system: Disallow compound assignment for tuples.
 * Type system: Detect cyclic dependencies between constants.
 * Type system: Disallow arrays with negative length.
 * Type system: Fix a crash related to invalid binary operators.
 * Type system: Disallow ``var`` declaration with empty tuple type.
 * Type system: Correctly convert function argument types to pointers for member functions.
 * Type system: Move privateness of constructor into AST itself.
 * Inline assembly: Charge one stack slot for non-value types during analysis.
 * Assembly output: Print source location before the operation it refers to instead of after.
 * Optimizer: Stop trying to optimize tricky constants after a while.



A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.4.10).
  