---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.4.17 Release Announcement'
date: '2017-09-21'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

As we are getting closer to the next breaking release, we want to give everyone a heads up by introducing `pragma experimental "v0.5.0"` which already enables some of the new safety features of the 0.5.0 release.

Furthermore, this release finally checks the modifiers ``view`` (used to be named ``constant``) and ``pure`` on functions. As a rule of thumb, use ``view`` if your function does not modify storage and ``pure`` if it does not even read any state information - but the compiler will also suggest the tightest restriction itself.

We also worked further on the new ABI encoder: Functions can now return structs. Switch it on using `pragma experimental ABIEncoderV2`. It should already work, but still generates more expensive code.

Finally, many new warnings were introduced and error messages improved.

**Features:**
 * Assembly Parser: Support multiple assignment (``x, y := f()``).
 * Code Generator: Keep a single copy of encoding functions when using the experimental "ABIEncoderV2".
 * Code Generator: Partial support for passing ``structs`` as arguments and return parameters (requires ``pragma experimental ABIEncoderV2;`` for now).
 * General: Support ``pragma experimental "v0.5.0";`` to activate upcoming breaking changes.
 * General: Added ``.selector`` member on external function types to retrieve their signature.
 * Optimizer: Add new optimization step to remove unused ``JUMPDEST``s.
 * Static Analyzer: Warn when using deprecated builtins ``sha3`` and ``suicide``
   (replaced by ``keccak256`` and ``selfdestruct``, introduced in 0.4.2 and 0.2.0, respectively).
 * Syntax Checker: Warn if no visibility is specified on contract functions.
 * Type Checker: Display helpful warning for unused function arguments/return parameters.
 * Type Checker: Do not show the same error multiple times for events.
 * Type Checker: Greatly reduce the number of duplicate errors shown for duplicate constructors and functions.
 * Type Checker: Warn on using literals as tight packing parameters in ``keccak256``, ``sha3``, ``sha256`` and ``ripemd160``.
 * Type Checker: Enforce ``view`` and ``pure``.
 * Type Checker: Enforce ``view`` / ``constant`` with error as experimental 0.5.0 feature.
 * Type Checker: Enforce fallback functions to be ``external`` as experimental 0.5.0 feature.

**Bugfixes:**
 * ABI JSON: Include all overloaded events.
 * Parser: Crash fix related to parseTypeName.
 * Type Checker: Allow constant byte arrays.




A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.4.17).
  