---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.5.4 Release Announcement'
date: '2019-02-12'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

This release adds support for calldata structs and packed encoding with ABIEncoderV2. We also introduced some changes to the C API and added support for continuous fuzzing via Google oss-fuzz. In addition to that, we added a new commandline option for improved (colorized) diagnostics formatting.

**Language Features:**
 * Allow calldata structs without dynamically encoded members with ABIEncoderV2.


**Compiler Features:**
 * ABIEncoderV2: Implement packed encoding.
 * C API (``libsolc`` / raw ``soljson.js``): Introduce ``solidity_free`` method which releases all internal buffers to save memory.
 * Commandline Interface: Adds new option ``new-reporter`` for improved diagnostics formatting
   along with ``color`` and ``no-color`` for colorized output to be forced (or explicitly disabled).


**Bugfixes:**
 * Code Generator: Defensively pad allocation of creationCode and runtimeCode to multiples of 32 bytes.
 * Commandline Interface: Allow yul optimizer only for strict assembly.
 * Parser: Disallow empty import statements.
 * Type Checker: Disallow mappings with data locations other than ``storage``.
 * Type Checker: Fix internal error when a struct array index does not fit into a uint256.
 * Type System: Properly report packed encoded size for arrays and structs (mostly unused until now).


**Build System:**
 * Add support for continuous fuzzing via Google oss-fuzz
 * SMT: If using Z3, require version 4.6.0 or newer.
 * Soltest: Add parser that is used in the file-based unit test environment.
 * Ubuntu PPA Packages: Use CVC4 as SMT solver instead of Z3



A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.5.4).
  