---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.5.13 Release Announcement'
date: '2019-11-14'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

Solidity 0.5.13 provides Istanbul-EVM compatibility (default is still set to Petersburg), is the first version to generate Ethereum-Webassembly (EWasm) binary output (not fully working yet, though), improves the developer experience by listing potential overloads when resolution fails and can output the layout of the storage variables of a contract. As with all other releases, the coverage of the SMT checker is further improved.


**Language Features:**
 * Allow to obtain the address of a linked library with ``address(LibraryName)``.


**Compiler Features:**
 * Code Generator: Use SELFBALANCE opcode for ``address(this).balance`` if using Istanbul EVM.
 * EWasm: Experimental EWasm binary output via ``ewasm`` and as documented in standard-json.
 * SMTChecker: Add break/continue support to the CHC engine.
 * SMTChecker: Support assignments to multi-dimensional arrays and mappings.
 * SMTChecker: Support inheritance and function overriding.
 * Standard JSON Interface: Output the storage layout of a contract when artifact ``storageLayout`` is requested.
 * TypeChecker: List possible candidates when overload resolution fails.


**Bugfixes:**
 * Code Generator: Fixed a faulty assert that would wrongly trigger for array sizes exceeding unsigned integer.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error when accessing indices of fixed bytes.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error when using function pointers as arguments.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error when implicitly converting string literals to fixed bytes.
 * Type Checker: Disallow constructor of the same class to be used as modifier.
 * Type Checker: Treat magic variables as unknown identifiers in inline assembly.



A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.5.13).
  