---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.5.8 Release Announcement'
date: '2019-04-30'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

This release fixes important but very unlikely bugs and further completes ABIEncoderV2, SMTChecker and Yul and improves the optimizer.

Notably, if ABIEncoderV2 is activated, the ABI decoder will now revert on input with dirty higher order bits instead of ignoring those bits.


**Important Bugfixes:**
 * Code Generator: Fix initialization routine of uninitialized internal function pointers in constructor context.
 * Type System: Use correct type name for contracts in event parameters when used in libraries. This affected code generation.
 * Yul Optimizer: Fix SSA transform for multi-assignments.


**Language Features:**
 * ABIEncoderV2: Implement encoding of calldata arrays and structs.
 * Code Generation: Implement copying recursive structs from storage to memory.
 * Yul: Disallow function definitions inside for-loop init blocks.


**Compiler Features:**
 * ABI Decoder: Raise a runtime error on dirty inputs when using the experimental decoder.
 * Optimizer: Add rule for shifts by constants larger than 255 for Constantinople.
 * Optimizer: Add rule to simplify certain ANDs and SHL combinations
 * SMTChecker: Support arithmetic compound assignment operators.
 * SMTChecker: Support unary increment and decrement for array and mapping access.
 * SMTChecker: Show unsupported warning for inline assembly blocks.
 * SMTChecker: Support mod.
 * SMTChecker: Support ``contract`` type.
 * SMTChecker: Support ``this`` as address.
 * SMTChecker: Support address members.
 * Standard JSON Interface: Metadata settings now re-produce the original ``"useLiteralContent"`` setting from the compilation input.
 * Yul: Adds break and continue keywords to for-loop syntax.
 * Yul: Support ``.`` as part of identifiers.
 * Yul Optimizer: Adds steps for detecting and removing of dead code.


**Bugfixes:**
 * SMTChecker: Implement Boolean short-circuiting.
 * SMTChecker: SSA control-flow did not take into account state variables that were modified inside inlined functions that were called inside branches.
 * Type System: Allow direct call to base class functions that have overloads.
 * Yul: Properly register functions and disallow shadowing between function variables and variables in the outside scope.


**Build System:**
 * Soltest: Add commandline option `test` / `-t` to isoltest which takes a string that allows filtering unit tests.
 * soltest.sh: allow environment variable ``SOLIDITY_BUILD_DIR`` to specify build folder and add ``help`` usage.



A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.5.8).
  