---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.7.4 Release Announcement'
date: '2020-10-19'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

[Solidity v0.7.4](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.7.4) fixes a storage corruption bug of medium severity.
To learn more about the bug and to check if your contract is vulnerable please read this [post](https://blog.soliditylang.org/2020/10/19/empty-byte-array-copy-bug) with further details about the bug. The bug has been reported by John Toman of the Certora development team.

Additionally, v0.7.4 adds constants at file-level.

## Important Bugfixes
 *  Code Generator: Fix data corruption bug when copying empty byte arrays from memory or calldata to storage. Read more [here](https://blog.soliditylang.org/2020/10/19/empty-byte-array-copy-bug).

## Notable New Features

### Constants at File-Level

In order to make functions at file-level more useful, Solidity now also allows to
define constant variables at file-level:

```solidity
uint constant EXPONENT = 10;
uint constant MULTIPLIER = 2**EXPONENT;

struct Fixed { uint value; }

function toFixed(uint x) pure returns (Fixed memory ret) {
    ret.value = x * MULTIPLIER;
}
```

Such constants have to follow the same rules as constants at contract-level.
This means, for example, the value has to be fixed at compile-time and only
some types are supported.

You can import constants from other source files like you import any other identifier:

``import {MyConstant, MyStruct} from "myHelper.sol";``



## Full Changelog

### Language Features: 
* Constants can be defined at file level.

### Compiler Features:
* Command Line Interface: New option ``--model-checker-engine`` allows to choose a specific SMTChecker engine. Options are ``all`` (default), ``bmc``, ``chc`` and ``none``.
* Control Flow Graph: Print warning for non-empty functions with unnamed return parameters that are not assigned a value in all code paths.
* SMTChecker: Support ``keccak256``, ``sha256``, ``ripemd160`` and ``ecrecover`` in the CHC engine.
* SMTChecker: Support inline arrays.
* SMTChecker: Support variables ``block``, ``msg`` and ``tx`` in the CHC engine.
* Standard JSON: New option ``modelCheckerSettings.engine`` allows to choose a specific SMTChecker engine. Options are ``all`` (default), ``bmc``, ``chc`` and ``none``.

### Bugfixes:
* Code generator: Fix ``ABIEncoderV2`` pragma from the current module affecting inherited functions and applied modifiers.
* Code generator: Fix internal compiler error when referencing members via module name but not using the reference.
* Code generator: Fix internal error on returning structs containing mappings from library function.
* Code generator: Use revert instead of invalid opcode for out-of-bounds array index access in getter.
* Contract Level Checker: Add missing check against inheriting functions with ABIEncoderV2 return types in ABIEncoderV1 contracts.
* Name Resolver: Fix shadowing/same-name warnings for later declarations.
* Type Checker: Allow arrays of contract types as type expressions and as arguments for ``abi.decode``.
* Type Checker: Disallow invalid use of library names as type name.
* Type Checker: Fix internal compiler error caused by storage parameters with nested mappings in libraries.

A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.7.4).
