---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.6.3 Release Announcement'
date: '2020-02-18'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

This release adds reason strings for compiler-generated reverts if you specify ``revert-strings debug`` or use the setting ``settings.debug.revertStrings = "debug"``. Furthermore, contract types and enums are now allowed as keys for mappings and the doxygen-style comments are better supported by the AST.


**Language Features:**
 * Allow contract types and enums as keys for mappings.
 * Allow function selectors to be used as compile-time constants.

**Compiler Features:**
 * AST: Add a new node for doxygen-style, structured documentation that can be received by contract, function, event and modifier definitions.
 * Code Generator: Use ``calldatacopy`` instead of ``codecopy`` to zero out memory past input.
 * Debug: Provide reason strings for compiler-generated internal reverts when using the ``revert-strings`` option or the ``settings.debug.revertStrings`` setting on ``debug`` mode.
 * Structured Documentation: Report source locations for structured documentation errors.
 * Yul Optimizer: Prune functions that call each other but are otherwise unreferenced.


**Bugfixes:**
 * Assembly Output: Added missing `source` field to legacy assembly json output to complete the source reference.
 * Parser: Fix an internal error for ``abstract`` without ``contract``.
 * Type Checker: Make invalid calls to uncallable types fatal errors instead of regular.





A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.6.3).
  