---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.7.1 Release Announcement'
date: '2020-09-02'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

[Solidity v0.7.1](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.7.1) adds functions at file-level and fixes several small bugs.


## Notable New Features 

### Functions At File-Level

Functions can now be defined at file-level. Such functions are called "free functions"
(as opposed to functions bound to a specific contract).

Free functions are always internal functions
and are meant to replace internal library functions and their very special behaviour.

A free function behaves like an internal function of the contract that called it.
The main difference is that a free function cannot directly access state variables and internal
functions of contracts. Free functions can call other contracts, emit events
and send Ether, and in this case, ``msg.sender`` will be the contract that called the free function.

A contract's storage can only be accessed from a free function if a storage pointer is passed to the
function (see the example below) or if inline assembly is used. The state mutability is checked,
which means that ``pure`` free functions cannot access storage or send Ether.

The code of a free function is only included into the contracts that use it.

```solidity
/// @dev returns the smaller of the two values.
function min(uint x, uint y) pure returns (uint) {
    return x < y ? x : y;
}

/// @dev returns the sum of the elements of the storage array
function sum(uint[] storage items) view returns (uint s) {
    for (uint i = 0; i < items.length; i++)
        s += items[i];
}
```

If free functions are imported from another file, it is recommended to
use the import statement that generates a new object, so that the file's scope
is not polluted needlessly:

helper.sol:
```solidity
function f() returns (uint) { /* ... */ }
```

main.sol:
```solidity
import "helper.sol" as Helper;

contract C {
    function g() public returns (uint) {
        return Helper.f();
    }
}
```

The ability to use `using A for B` for free functions is planned for future releases.


## Full Changelog

### Language Features:
 * Allow function definitions outside of contracts, behaving much like internal library functions.
 * Code generator: Implemented copying structs from calldata to storage.

### Compiler Features:
 * SMTChecker: Add underflow and overflow as verification conditions in the CHC engine.
 * SMTChecker: Support bitwise or, xor and not operators.
 * SMTChecker: Support conditional operator.
 * Standard JSON Interface: Do not run EVM bytecode code generation, if only Yul IR or EWasm output is requested.
 * Yul Optimizer: LoopInvariantCodeMotion can move reading operations outside for-loops as long as the affected area is not modified inside the loop.
 * Yul: Report error when using non-string literals for ``datasize()``, ``dataoffset()``, ``linkersymbol()``, ``loadimmutable()``, ``setimmutable()``.


### Bugfixes:
 * AST: Remove ``null`` member values also when the compiler is used in standard-json-mode.
 * General: Allow `type(Contract).name` for abstract contracts and interfaces.
 * Immutables: Disallow assigning immutables more than once during their declaration.
 * Immutables: Properly treat complex assignment and increment/decrement as both reading and writing and thus disallow it everywhere for immutable variables.
 * Optimizer: Keep side-effects of ``x`` in ``byte(a, shr(b, x))`` even if the constants ``a`` and ``b`` would make the expression zero unconditionally. This optimizer rule is very hard if not impossible to trigger in a way that it can result in invalid code, though.
 * References Resolver: Fix internal bug when using constructor for library.
 * Scanner: Fix bug where whitespace would be allowed within the ``->`` token (e.g. ``function f() -   > x {}`` becomes invalid in inline assembly and Yul).
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error in BMC function inlining.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error on array implicit conversion.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error on fixed bytes index access.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error on lvalue unary operators with tuples.
 * SMTChecker: Fix soundness of array ``pop``.
 * Type Checker: Disallow ``using for`` directive inside interfaces.
 * Type Checker: Disallow signed literals as exponent in exponentiation operator.
 * Type Checker: Disallow structs containing nested mapping in memory as parameters for library functions.
 * Yul Optimizer: Ensure that Yul keywords are not mistakenly used by the NameDispenser and VarNameCleaners. The bug would manifest as uncompilable code.
 * Yul Optimizer: Make function inlining order more resilient to whether or not unrelated source files are present.




A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.7.1).
