---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.6.7 Release Announcement'
date: '2020-05-04'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

[Solidity v0.6.7](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.6.7) introduces support for EIP-165 via `type(InterfaceName).interfaceId`.


**Language Features:**
 * Add support for EIP 165 interface identifiers with `type(I).interfaceId`.
 * Allow virtual modifiers inside abstract contracts to have empty body.


**Compiler Features:**
 * Optimizer: Simplify repeated AND and OR operations.
 * Option to specify optimization steps to be performed by Yul optimizer with `yul-optimizations` in the commandline interface or `optimizer.details.yulDetails.optimizerSteps` in standard-json.
 * Standard Json Input: Support the prefix ``file://`` in the field ``urls``.

**Bugfixes:**
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error when fixed points are used.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error when using array slices.
 * Type Checker: Disallow ``virtual`` and ``override`` for constructors.
 * Type Checker: Fix several internal errors by performing size and recursiveness checks of types before the full type checking.
 * Type Checker: Fix internal error when assigning to empty tuples.
 * Type Checker: Fix internal error when applying unary operators to tuples with empty components.
 * Type Checker: Perform recursiveness check on structs declared at the file level.


**Build System:**
 * soltest.sh: ``SOLIDITY_BUILD_DIR`` is no longer relative to ``REPO_ROOT`` to allow for build directories outside of the source tree.







A big thank you to all contributors who helped  make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.6.7).
  