---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.7.5 Release Announcement'
date: '2020-11-18'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

[Solidity v0.7.5](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.7.5) adds the ability so select the ABI coder via ``pragma abicoder v1`` and ``pragma abicoder v2`` in preparation for making ABI coder v2 the default for 0.8.0 and introduces ``--experimental-via-ir`` which compiles via the new experimental Yul-based compiler pipeline.

## Full Changelog

### Language Features: 
 * Ability to select the abi coder using ``pragma abicoder v1`` and ``pragma abicoder v2``.
 * Inline Assembly: Use ``.offset`` and ``.length`` for calldata variables of dynamic array type to access their calldata offset and length (number of elements). Both of them can also be assigned to.
 * Immutable variables with literal number values are considered pure.

### Compiler Features:
 * Assembler: Perform linking in assembly mode when library addresses are provided.
 * Command Line Interface: New option ``--experimental-via-ir`` allows switching compilation process to go through the Yul intermediate representation. This is highly experimental and is used for development purposes.
 * Command Line Interface: New option ``--model-checker-timeout`` sets a timeout in milliseconds for each individual query performed by the SMTChecker.
 * Command Line Interface: Report error if file could not be read in ``--standard-json`` mode.
 * Command Line interface: Report proper error for each output file which could not be written. Previously an exception was thrown, and execution aborted, on the first error.
 * SMTChecker: Add division by zero checks in the CHC engine.
 * SMTChecker: More precise analysis of external calls using ``this``.
 * SMTChecker: Support ``selector`` for expressions with value known at compile-time.
 * Standard JSON: New option ``modelCheckerSettings.timeout`` sets a timeout in milliseconds for each individual query performed by the SMTChecker.
 * Standard JSON: New option ``settings.viaIR`` allows the same switch as ``--experimental-via-ir`` on the commandline.

### Bugfixes:
 * Code generator: Fix missing creation dependency tracking for abstract contracts.
 * Command Line Interface: Fix write error when the directory passed to ``--output-dir`` ends with a slash.
 * Command Line Interface: Reject duplicate libraries in ``--libraries`` option instead of arbitrarily choosing one.
 * NatSpec: Fix internal error when inheriting return parameter documentation but the parameter names differ between base and inherited.
 * SMTChecker: Fix CHC false positives when branches are used inside modifiers.
 * SMTChecker: Fix false negative in modifier applied multiple times.
 * SMTChecker: Fix incorrect counterexamples reported by the CHC engine.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error in the BMC engine when inherited contract from a different source unit has private state variables.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error on conversion from string literal to byte.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error when ``array.push()`` is used as the LHS of an assignment.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error when assigning state variable via contract's name.
 * SMTChecker: Fix internal error when using tuples of rational literals inside the conditional operator.
 * SMTChecker: Fix lack of reporting potential violations when using only the CHC engine.
 * Standard JSON: Fix library addresses specified in ``libraries`` being used for linking even if the file names do not match.

### AST Changes:
 * New member ``suffix`` for inline assembly identifiers. Currently supported values are ``"slot"``, ``"offset"`` and ``"length"`` to access the components of a Solidity variable.

A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.7.5).
