---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.8.6 Release Announcement'
date: '2021-06-22'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

[Solidity v0.8.6](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.6) fixes some
non-critical but annoying bugs, especially a warning about unreachable code that
is in fact reachable.

## Bugfixes

### Unreachable Warning

With Solidity 0.8.5, we released a new feature that detects if code is unreachable
because a called function always reverts before the code is executed. This detection contained a bug
in connection with nested calls to internal library functions where the "reverting behaviour"
of a function was not properly updated after a
function called by it was determined to be not always reverting.

Because the bug was rather common, we are releasing this version with an unusually
short changelog.

### Optimizer Setting

We discovered that the default optimizer setting differed depending on the way
the compiler was invoked: Using the compiler on the commandline ("``solc``")
caused minimal optimizer features to be activated (the intended functionality)
while using ``solc-js`` all optimizer features were disabled.

These minimal features are the "peephole optimizer", a routine that performs
obvious replacements like removing ``PUSH1 0 POP`` and the "jumpdest remover"
which removes code that is not jumped to from anywhere.

The peephole optimizer and the jumpdest remover are activated even when
setting ``settings.optimizer.enabled`` to ``false`` in Standard JSON
and have to be explicitly disabled in the detailed settings.

The bug was that providing a value for ``settings.optimizer`` but not including
``enabled`` in it was not equivalent to setting ``enabled`` to ``false``.
It was equivalent to explicitly disabling all optimizer components.
If ``settings.optimizer`` was not provided at all, the bug did not manifest.


## Full Changelog

### Language Features
 * Yul: Special meaning of ``".metadata"`` data object in Yul object.


### Bugfixes
 * Control Flow Graph: Fix incorrectly reported unreachable code.
 * Solc-Js: When running ``solcjs`` without the ``--optimize`` flag, use ``settings.optimizer.enabled=false`` in Standard JSON instead of omitting the key.
 * Standard JSON: Omitting ``settings.optimizer.enabled`` was not equivalent to setting it to ``false``. It meant disabling also the peephole optimizer and jumpdest remover which by default still run with ``enabled=false``.


A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.6).