---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.8.14 Release Announcement'
date: '2022-05-18'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

[Solidity v0.8.14](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.14)
fixes two important bugs.

The first one is related to ABI-encoding nested arrays directly from calldata.
You can find more information in the [blog post](/2022/05/17/calldata-reencode-size-check-bug/).

The second bug is triggered in certain inheritance structures and can
cause a memory pointer to be interpreted as a calldata pointer or
vice-versa. We also have a dedicated [blog post](/2022/05/17/data-location-inheritance-bug/) about this bug.

Apart from these, there are several minor bug fixes and improvements.

_Please note: Unfortunately, the npm wrapper package of this version is corrupted. Using the new ``soljson.js`` with solc-js 0.8.13 will work, but the 0.8.14 npm release (now marked as deprecated) is missing a file and due to that does not work properly. We released [0.8.14-fixed](https://www.npmjs.com/package/solc/v/0.8.14-fixed) in case you need a working npm package as dependency. Note however, that npm will not pick it up automatically._

## Full Changelog

Important Bugfixes:
 * ABI Encoder: When ABI-encoding values from calldata that contain nested arrays, correctly validate the nested array length against ``calldatasize()`` in all cases.
 * Override Checker: Allow changing data location for parameters only when overriding external functions.


Compiler Features:
 * Assembly-Json Exporter: Include source list in `sourceList` field.
 * Commandline Interface: Option ``--pretty-json`` works also with the following options: ``--abi``, ``--asm-json``, ``--ast-compact-json``, ``--devdoc``, ``--storage-layout``, ``--userdoc``.
 * Language Server: Allow full filesystem access to language server.
 * Peephole Optimizer: Remove operations without side effects before simple terminations.
 * SMTChecker: Support ``abi.encodeCall`` taking into account the called selector.


Bugfixes:
 * Assembly-Json Exporter: Fix assembly json export to store jump types of operations in `jumpType` field instead of `value`.
 * SMTChecker: Fix ABI compatibility with z3 >=4.8.16.
 * SMTChecker: Fix bug when z3 is selected but not available at runtime.
 * Type Checker: Properly check restrictions of ``using ... global`` in conjunction with libraries.
 * TypeChecker: Convert parameters of function type to how they would be called for ``abi.encodeCall``.


A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.14).
