---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Solidity 0.8.16 Release Announcement'
date: '2022-08-08'
author: Solidity Team
category: Releases
---

[Solidity v0.8.16](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.16)
fixes an important bug.

The bug may result in small parts of dynamic tuple components being inadvertently zeroed during
ABI re-encoding when the last component is a statically-sized `uint` or `bytes32` calldata array.
See [Head Overflow Bug in Calldata Tuple ABI-Reencoding](/2022/08/08/calldata-tuple-reencoding-head-overflow-bug/)
for more information.

Apart from that, there are several minor bug fixes and improvements like more gas-efficient overflow checks
for addition and subtraction.

## Full Changelog

Important Bugfixes:
 * Code Generation: Fix data corruption that affected ABI-encoding of calldata values represented by tuples: structs at any nesting level; argument lists of external functions, events and errors; return value lists of external functions. The 32 leading bytes of the first dynamically-encoded value in the tuple would get zeroed when the last component contained a statically-encoded array.


Compiler Features:
 * Code Generator: More efficient code for checked addition and subtraction.
 * TypeChecker: Support using library constants in initializers of other constants.
 * Yul IR Code Generation: Improved copy routines for arrays with packed storage layout.
 * Yul Optimizer: Add rule to convert ``mod(add(X, Y), A)`` into ``addmod(X, Y, A)``, if ``A`` is a power of two.
 * Yul Optimizer: Add rule to convert ``mod(mul(X, Y), A)`` into ``mulmod(X, Y, A)``, if ``A`` is a power of two.


Bugfixes:
 * Commandline Interface: Disallow the following options outside of the compiler mode: ``--via-ir``,``--metadata-literal``, ``--metadata-hash``, ``--model-checker-show-unproved``, ``--model-checker-div-mod-no-slacks``, ``--model-checker-engine``, ``--model-checker-invariants``, ``--model-checker-solvers``, ``--model-checker-timeout``, ``--model-checker-contracts``, ``--model-checker-targets``.
 * Type Checker: Fix compiler crash on tuple assignments involving certain patterns with unary tuples on the left-hand side.
 * Type Checker: Fix compiler crash when ``abi.encodeCall`` received a tuple expression instead of an inline tuple.
 * Type Checker: Fix null dereference in ``abi.encodeCall`` type checking of free function.

A big thank you to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

Download the new version of Solidity here: [v0.8.16](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.16).
